# QC metrics

## Folder content

This folder contains scripts tasked to:
(1) Infer QC metrics and associated plots to visually explore the quality of the data
(2) Evaluate the QC metrics and set filters to remove low quality cells
in 10x single-cell- and single-nuclei-RNA-sequencing libraries (with or without cell hashing experiment).


The QC metrics will be divided in before and after filtering low quality cells from the library.

# A. Pre-Processing Information

## (i) QC metrics as generated by cellranger count (count_summary: <sample_name>.web_summary.html)
## (ii) Seurat QC metrics
   - 01_Seurat_QC_<sample_name> For example: `01_Seurat_QC.Rmd`
     - User will have to define `params` as needed for their experiment.
     - Read in 10x data
     - Save rds to `r paste0(out_path, "/", "seurat_obj_raw.rds")`
     BEFORE FILTER
     - unfiltered_violin_qc: nFeature_RNA, nCount_RNA, percent.mt
     - unfiltered_qc: plot number of genes, plot number of UMIs, plot percent mitochondrial reads
     - Summary of Cell Statistics: Percent of reads in cells, Median UMI count per cell, Median genes detected per cell, Median percent reads mitochondrial


    FILTER DATA - DEFINE METHOD AND/OR THRESHOLDS ACROSS SAMPLES
    - This can be defined manually by changing the `params` min_genes, max_genes, and max_mt.
    - We wil add later the option to run miQC (see below).
          
    We calculate the probability that a cell is compromised due to degradation or rupture using miQC (https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/miQC.html) (Hippen et al. 2021). This relies on fitting a mixture model using the number of genes expressed by a cell and the percentage of mitochondrial reads. The expected plot will show a characteristic triangular shape and two model fit lines. Cells with low numbers of genes expressed may have both low and high mitochondrial percentage, but cells with many genes tend to have a low mitochondrial percentage. Compromised cells are likely to have a fewer genes detected and higher percentage of mitochondrial reads.

    If the model has failed to fit properly, the pattern of cells may differ, and there may not be model fit lines. This can be the result of a low-quality library or may occur if there is no mitochondrial content, as in the case of a high-quality single-nucleus sample. In such situations, the calculated probability of compromise may not be valid (see miQC vignette (https://bioconductor.org/packages/3.13/bioc/vignettes/miQC/inst/doc/miQC.html#when-not-to-use-miqc) for more details).

   This should also produce a plot Mitochondrial percentage/Number of genes detected: keep-remove
   Check this script out: https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf/blob/main/bin/post_process_sce.R



    AFTER FILTER
     - filtered_violin_qc: nFeature_RNA, nCount_RNA, percent.mt
     - filtered_qc: plot number of genes, plot number of UMIs, plot percent mitochondrial reads
     - Summary of Cell Statistics: Percent of reads in cells, Median UMI count per cell, Median genes detected per cell, Median percent reads mitochondrial
     - Cell Read Metrics Plots: Percent of cells expressing gene, Number of Expressed Genes Per Library Size (log10)
     - Normalize the data using `r normalize_method`, run `runpca`, run `dimred`/ Save metadata as a csv to `r glue("{out_path}/metadata_create_{sample_name}.csv")`/ Plot dimensionality reduction. / Save rds to `r paste0(out_path, "/", "seurat_obj.rds")`


- To add Knee plot: Total UMI count/Rank - Not sure how to do this: file:///Users/chronia/CHOP/projects/Alexslemonade/sample_data/SCPCS000022/SCPCL000022_qc.html



Then, we will use additional QC metrics to filter out ambient RNA and doublets in the library.

# B. Pre-Processing Information

## Estimating and filtering out ambient mRNA (`empty droplets`)

SoupX method profiles “the soup”, i.e., collection of cell-free mRNAs floating in the input solution. The soup looks different for each input solution and strongly resembles the expression pattern obtained by summing all the individual cells.

SoupX calculates `Cell-specific contamination fraction` (Estimate (or manually set) the contamination fraction, the fraction of UMIs originating from the background, in each cell) and infers a `corrected expression matrix` (Correct the expression of each cell using the ambient mRNA expression profile and estimated contamination).

This will read the `read_10x_data` from cellranger output (`./outs/analysis/clustering`) and should generate the below:

  - Contamination summary table
  - Plot Cell-specific contamination fraction 
  - Save filtered matrix


## Estimating and filtering out doublets

Popular approach of scRNAseq uses oil droplets or wells to isolate single cells along with barcoded beads. Depending on the cell density loaded, a proportion of reaction volumes (i.e. droplets or wells) will capture more than one cell, forming ‘doublets’ (or ‘multiplets’), i.e. two or more cells captured by a single reaction volume and thus sequenced as a single-cell artifact. 

The proportion of doublets is proportional to the number of cells captured. Common in single-cell experiments to have 10-20% doublets, making accurate doublet detection critical.

Doublets are prevalent in single-cell sequencing data and can lead to artifactual findings. We will use a computational approach to calculate and remove doublets from the library.

We can use scDblFinder (https://f1000research.com/articles/10-979) or Scrublet (https://github.com/swolock/scrublet).
In either case, let us plot doublet prediction,, save table with predictions scores, and matrix after removing doublets.



# C. Post-Processing Information
After filtering low quality cells, ambient RNA, and doublets, let us save the final seurat object and metadata for the library.
